
--- PAGE 1 ---
NLP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case
study.
Alessandro Lenci1, Simonetta Montemagni2, Vito Pirrelli2, Giulia
Venturi2
1Dipartimento di Linguistica Ű Università di Pisa, Italy
2Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale - CNR, Italy
Abstract.
The paper reports on the methodology and preliminary results of a
case study in automatically extracting ontological knowledge from Italian legislative
texts in the environmental domain. We use a fully–implemented ontology learning
system (T2K) that includes a battery of tools for Natural Language Processing
(NLP), statistical text analysis and machine language learning. Tools are dynam-
ically integrated to provide an incremental representation of the content of vast
repositories of unstructured documents. Evaluated results, however preliminary, are
very encouraging, showing the great potential of NLP–powered incremental systems
like T2K for accurate large–scale semi-automatic extraction of legal ontologies.
Keywords: ontology learning, document management, knowledge extraction from
texts, Natural Language Processing
1. Introduction
Ontology building is nowadays a very active research ﬁeld, as witnessed
by the fast growing literature on the topic and the increasing number
of Knowledge Management applications based on automated routines
for ontology navigation and update. The enterprise, however, requires
harvesting domain–speciﬁc knowledge on an unprecedented scale, by
tapping and harmonizing knowledge sources of highly heterogeneous
conception, format and coverage, ranging from foundational ontologies
and structured databases to electronic text documents. As electronic
texts still represent the most accessible and natural repositories of
specialised information worldwide, we seem to have reached a stage
where an unlimited demand for ontologically–interpreted knowledge
disproportionally exceeds the availability of automatically–interpreted
textual information.
To bridge such a critical gap, diﬀerent methodologies have been
proposed to automatically extract information from texts and pro-
vide a structured organisation of extracted knowledge in as diverse
domains/sectors as bio–informatics, health–care, public administration
and company document bases. The situation in the legal domain is in
line with this general trend and probably made even more critical by
the fact that laws are invariably conveyed through natural language.


--- PAGE 2 ---
114
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
The last few years have seen a growing body of research and practice
in constructing legal ontologies and applying them to the law domain.
A number of legal ontologies have been proposed in diﬀerent research
projects: yet, most of them focus on a upper level of concepts and were
mostly hand-crafted by domain experts (for a survey of legal ontolo-
gies, see Valente 2005). It goes without saying that realistically large
knowledge-based applications in the legal domain need more compre-
hensive ontologies incorporating up-to-date knowledge: ontology-learn-
ing from texts could be of some help in this direction.
To our knowledge, however, relatively few attempts have been made
so far to automatically induce legal domain ontologies from texts: this is
the case, for instance, of Lame (2005), Saias and Quaresma (2005) and
Walter and Pinkal (2006). The work illustrated in this paper represents
another attempt in this direction. It reports the results of a case study
carried out in the legal domain to automatically induce ontological
knowledge from texts with an ontology learning system, hereafter re-
ferred to as T2K (Text–to–Knowledge), jointly designed and developed
by the Institute of Computational Linguistics (CNR) and the Depart-
ment of Linguistics of the University of Pisa. The system oﬀers a battery
of tools for Natural Language Processing (NLP), statistical text analysis
and machine language learning, which are dynamically integrated to
provide an accurate representation of the content of vast repositories of
unstructured documents in technical domains (Dell’Orletta et al., 2006).
Text interpretation ranges from acquisition of lexical and terminologi-
cal resources, to advanced syntax and ontological/conceptual mapping.
Interpretation results are annotated as XML metadata, thus oﬀering
the further bonus of a growing interoperability with automated content
management systems for personalised knowledge proﬁling. Prototype
versions of T2K are currently running on public administration portals
and have been used for indexing E–learning and E–commerce materials.
In what follows, we report some ontology learning experiments carried
out with T2K on Italian legislative texts.
2. From text to knowledge: the role of NLP tools
Technologies in the area of knowledge management and information
access are confronted with a typical acquisition paradox. As know-
ledge is mostly conveyed through text, content access requires under-
standing the linguistic structures representing content in text at a level
of considerable detail. In turn, processing linguistic structures at the
depth needed for content understanding presupposes that a considerable
amount of domain knowledge is already in place. Structural ambigui-


--- PAGE 3 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
115
ties, long–range dependency chains, complex domain–speciﬁc terms and
the ubiquitous surface variability of phraseological expressions require
the operation of a battery of disambiguating constraints, i.e. a set of
interface rules mapping the underlying conceptual organization of a
domain onto surface language. With no such constraints in place, text
becomes a slippery ground of unstructured, strongly perspectivised and
combinatorially ambiguous information bits.
In our view, there is no simple way out of this paradox. Pattern
matching techniques allow for fragments of knowledge to be tracked
down only in very limited text windows, while foundational ontologies
are too general to be able to make successful contact with language
variability at large. The only eﬀective solution, we believe, is to un-
derstand and face the paradox in its full complexity. An incremental
interleaving of robust parsing technology and machine learning tech-
niques can go a long way towards meeting this objective. Language
technology oﬀers the jumping-oﬀpoint for segmenting texts into gram-
matically meaningful syntagmatic units and organizing them into non-
recursive phrasal "chunks" that do not seem to require domain-speciﬁc
knwoledge. In turn, chunked texts can sensibly be accessed and com-
pared for statistically–signiﬁcant patterns of domain–speciﬁc terms to
be tracked down. Surely, this level of paradigmatic categorization is
still very rudimentary: at this stage we do not yet know how chunked
units are mutually related in context (i.e. what grammatical relations
link them in texts) or how similar they are semantically. To go beyond
this stage, we suggest getting back to the syntagmatic organization of
texts. Current parsing technologies allow for local dependency relations
among chunks to be identiﬁed reliably. If a suﬃciently large amount of
parsed text is provided, local dependencies can be used to acquire a ﬁrst
level of domain–speciﬁc conceptual organization. We can then use this
preliminary conceptual map for harder and longer dependency chains to
be parsed and for larger and deeper conceptual networks to be acquired.
To sum up, facing the bootstrapping paradox requires an incremental
process of annotation–acquisition–annotation, whereby domain–speciﬁc
knowledge is acquired from linguistically–annotated texts and then pro-
jected back onto texts for extra linguistic information to be annotated
and further knowledge layers to be extracted.
To implement this scenario, a few NLP ingredients are required.
Preliminary term extraction presupposes pos–tagged texts, where each
word form is assigned the contextually appropriate part–of–speech and a
set of morpho–syntactic features plus an indication of lemma. Whenever
more information about the local syntactic context is to be exploited,
it is advisable that basic syntactic structures are identiﬁed. As we shall
see in more detail below, we use chunking technology to attain this


--- PAGE 4 ---
116
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
level of basic syntactic structuring. NLP requirements become more de-
manding when identiﬁed terms need be organised into larger conceptual
structures and connected through long–distance relational information.
For this purpose syntactic information must include identiﬁcation of
dependencies among lexical heads.
The approach to ontology learning adopted by T2K diﬀerentially
exploits all these levels of linguistic annotation of texts in an incre-
mental fashion. Term extraction operates on texts annotated with ba-
sic syntactic structures (so-called “chunks”, see below). Identiﬁcation
of conceptual structures, on the other hand, is carried out against a
dependency–annotated text. In what follows, the general architecture
of the Italian parsing system underlying T2K (henceforth referred to as
AnIta, Bartolini et al., 2004) is brieﬂy illustrated.
2.1. An outline of AnIta
The AnIta system consists of a suite of linguistic tools in charge of:
1. tokenisation of the input text;
2. morphological analysis (including lemmatisation) of the text;
3. parsing, articulated in two diﬀerent steps:
a) “chunking”, carried out simultaneously with morpho-syntactic
disambiguation;
b) dependency analysis.
In what follows we will focus on the syntactic parsing components in
charge of the linguistic pre-processing of texts for the diﬀerent ontology
learning tasks of T2K.
Text chunking is carried out through a battery of ﬁnite state au-
tomata (CHUG–IT, Federici et al., 1996), which takes as input a mor-
phologically analysed and lemmatised text and segments it into an un-
structured (non-recursive) sequence of syntactically organized text units
called “chunks” (e.g. nominal, verbal, prepositional chunks). Chunking
requires a minimum of linguistic knowledge; its lexicon contains no
other information than the entry’s lemma, part of speech and morpho–
syntactic features. A chunk is a textual unit of adjacent word tokens
sharing the property of being related through dependency relations (es.
pre–modiﬁer, auxiliary, determiner, etc.). A chunked sentence, how-
ever, does not give information about the nature and scope of inter–
chunk dependencies which are identiﬁed during the phase of dependency
analysis (see below). Morpho–syntactic disambiguation is performed
simultaneously to the chunking process.


--- PAGE 5 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
117
Il presente decreto stabilisce le norme per la prevenzione ed il contenimento
dell’inquinamento da rumore [...]
‘this decree establishes the rules for prevention and control of noise pollution [...]’
[[CC:N_C][DET:IL#RD@MS][PREMOD:PRESENTE#A@MS][POTGOV:DECRETO#S@MS]]
[[CC:FV_C][POTGOV:STABILIRE#V@S3IP]]
[[CC:N_C][DET:LO#RD@FP][POTGOV:NORMA#S@FP]]
[[CC:P_C][PREP:PER#E][DET:LO#RD@FS][POTGOV:PREVENZIONE#S@FS]]
[[CC:COORD_C][CONJTYPE:E#CC]]
[[CC:N_C][DET:IL#RD@MS][POTGOV:CONTENIMENTO#S@MS]]
[[CC:di_C][DET:LO#RD@MS][POTGOV:INQUINAMENTO#S@MS]]
[[CC:P_C][PREP:DA#E][POTGOV:RUMORE#S@MS]]
Figure 1. A sample of chunked text
To be more concrete, the sentence fragment reported in Figure 1
is segmented into eight chunks, each including a sequence of adjacent
word tokens mutually related through dependency links of some kind.
For example, the ﬁrst nominal chunk (N_C) covers three word tokens, il
presente decreto: the noun head decreto, the adjectival premodiﬁer pre-
sente and an introducing deﬁnite article. Although the representation is
silent about the relationship between stabilire ‘establish’ and le norme
‘the rules’, this is not to entail that such a relationship cannot possibly
hold: simply, the lexical knowledge available to this parsing component
makes it impossible to state unambiguously how chunks relate to each
other and the nature of this relationship. This is the task for further
analysis steps.
Dependency parsing is aimed at identifying the full range of syn-
tactic relations (e.g. subject, object, modiﬁer, complement, etc.) within
each sentence: syntactic relations are represented as dependency pairs
between lexical heads. It is carried out by IDEAL (Bartolini et al.,
2002), a ﬁnite state compiler for dependency grammars. The IDEAL
general grammar of Italian is formed by ca. 100 rules covering the
major syntactic phenomena. The grammar rules are regular expressions
(implemented as ﬁnite state automata) deﬁned over chunk sequences,
augmented with tests on chunk and lexical attributes. A “conﬁdence
value” (PLAUS) is associated with identiﬁed dependency relations, to
determine a plausibility ranking among competing analyses. Figure 2
reports the dependency representation of the same sentence.
The output consists of binary relations between content words, typ-
ically a head and a dependent. There may be features associated with
both participants in the relation conveying other types of information
such as the semantic type of a dependent (ROLE) or the preposition


--- PAGE 6 ---
118
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
MODIF(DECRETO[34544.1],PRESENTE[34544.1]<role=RESTR>)plaus=100
SUBJ(STABILIRE[34544.2],DECRETO[34544.1])plaus=50
OBJD(STABILIRE[34544.2],NORMA[34544.3])plaus=50
COMP(NORMA[34544.3],PREVENZIONE[34544.4]<intro=PER>)plaus=50
COORD(PREVENZIONE[34544.4],CONTENIMENTO[34544.6]<role=CONJ>)plaus=50
ARG(CONTENIMENTO[34544.6],INQUINAMENTO[34544.7]<intro=DI>)plaus=60
COMP(INQUINAMENTO[34544.7],RUMORE[34544.8]<intro=DA>)plaus=50
Figure 2. A sample of dependency–parsed text
introducing a certain relation (INTRO). The sentence fragment is de-
scribed by 7 dependency relations including subject, object as well as
other modiﬁcation relations: for instance, decreto has been identiﬁed as
the subject of the verb stabilire and norme as its direct object.
There are some reasons to believe that chunked texts are a suitable
starting point for term extraction from a continuously expanding doc-
ument base. First, thanks to its knowledge–poor lexicon, chunking is
fairly domain–independent. Moreover, its ﬁnite–state technology makes
chunking very robust and ﬂexible in the face of parse failures: unparsed
sequences are tagged as unknown chunks and parsing can resume from
the ﬁrst ensuing word–form which is part of a parsable chunk. Thirdly,
chunking provides a ﬁrst level of syntactic grouping which, however
crude, paves the way to reliable and wide–coverage identiﬁcation of
candidate domain terminology, including both single and multi–word
terms. As chunks standardise a considerable amount of grammatical in-
formation, searching for candidate terms in a chunked text can be done
at a considerable level of abstraction from language nitty–gritty. On
the other hand, identiﬁcation of clusters of semantically related terms
or acquisition of relations between terms constitute more demanding
tasks requiring deeper levels of linguistic analysis such as dependency
parsing.
3. T2K architecture
T2K is a hybrid ontology learning system combining linguistic tech-
nologies and statistical techniques. T2K does its job into two basic
steps:
1. extraction of domain terminology, both single and multi–word terms,
from a document base;


--- PAGE 7 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
119
2. organization and structuring of the set of acquired terms into proto-
conceptual structures, namely a) fragments of taxonomical chains,
and b) clusters of semantically related terms.
Figure 3 illustrates the functional architecture of T2K:
Figure 3. T2K architecture
The two basic steps take the central pillar of the portrayed archi-
tecture, showing the interleaving of NLP and statistical tools. Acquired
results are structured in the ontology box on the right–hand–side of
the diagram, whose stratiﬁed organization is reminiscent of the hier-
archical cascade of knowledge layers in the “Ontology Learning Layer
Cake” by (Buitelaar et al., 2005), going from terminological information
to proto–conceptual structures corresponding to taxonomical and non-
hierarchical relationships among terms. Acquired knowledge is also used
for document indexing, on the basis of extracted terms and acquired
conceptual structures. In what follows we focus on the ontology learning
process.
3.1. Term extraction
Term extraction is the ﬁrst and most–established step in ontology learn-
ing from texts. Terms are surface realisations of domain–speciﬁc con-
cepts and represent, for this reason, a basic prerequisite for more ad-
vanced ontology learning tasks. In principle, they need be recognized
whatever the surface form they show in context, irrespectively of morpho–
syntactic and syntactic variants. For our present purposes, a term can be
a common noun as well as a complex nominal structure with modiﬁers


--- PAGE 8 ---
120
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
(typically, adjectival and prepositional modiﬁers). Term extraction thus
requires some level of linguistic pre-processing of texts.
T2K looks for terms in syntactically chunked texts such as those
illustrated in Section 2.1 (Figure 1). Candidate terms may be one word
terms (“single terms”) or multi–word terms (“complex terms”). The
acquisition strategy diﬀers in the two cases.
Single terms are identiﬁed on the basis of frequency counts in the
chunked source texts, after discounting stop–words. The acquisition of
multi–word terms, on the other hand, follows a two–stage strategy.
First, the chunked text is searched for on the basis of a set of chunk
patterns. Chunk patterns encode syntactic templates of candidate com-
plex terms, interpreted and applied by the IDEAL compiler. The set
of chunk patterns covers the main types of modiﬁcation observed in
complex nominal terms: i.e. adjectival modiﬁcation (e.g. organizzazione
internazionale ‘international organisation’), prepositional modiﬁcation
(e.g. tutela del territorio ‘protection of the territory’), including more
complex cases where diﬀerent modiﬁcation types are compounded (e.g.
incenerimento dei riﬁuti pericolosi ‘incineration of dangerous waste’).
Secondly, the list of acquired potential complex terms is ranked accord-
ing to their log–likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993), an association measure
that quantiﬁes how likely the constituents of a complex term are to oc-
cur together in a corpus if they were (in)dipendently distributed, where
the (in)dependence hypothesis is estimated with the binomial distribu-
tion of their joint and disjoint frequencies. We tested the log–likelihood
ratio against other association measures such as mutual information,
chi–square etc., log-likelihood faring consistently better than the others.
Moreover this measure is known to be less prone to assigning high scores
to very sparse pairs. It should be recalled that the log–likelihood ratio
is commonly used for discovering collocations. Hence, we are treating
complex terms as though they belonged to the more general class of
collocations. However, T2K uses the log–likelihood ratio in a somewhat
atypical way: instead of measuring the association strength between
adjacent words, T2K measures it between the lexico–semantic heads
of adjacent chunks. The main and often underestimated advantage of
deﬁning co–occurrence patterns over syntactic structures is that we can
broaden our search space (the text window) in a controlled way, by
making it sure that there is a syntactic pattern linking two adjacent
lexical heads.
So far, acquisition of potential complex terms has involved chunk
pairs only (bigrams). In T2K recognition of longer terms is carried
out by iterating the extraction process on the results of the previous
acquisition step. This means that acquired complex terms are projected
back onto the original text and the acquisition procedure is iterated on


--- PAGE 9 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
121
the newly annotated text. The method proves helpful in reducing the
number of false positives consisting of more than two chunks (Bartolini
et al., 2005). Interestingly, the chunk patterns used for recognition
of multi–word terms need not necessarily be the same across diﬀe-
rent iteration stages. In fact, it is advisable to introduce potentially
noisy patterns only at later stages. This is the case, for instance, of
coordination patterns.
The iterative process of term acquisition yields a list of candidate
single terms ranked by decreasing frequencies, and a list of candidate
complex terms ranked by decreasing scores of association strength. The
selection of a ﬁnal set of terms to be included in the TermBank requires
some threshold tuning, depending on the size of the document collection
and the typology and reliability of expected results. Thresholds deﬁne
a) the minimum frequency for a candidate term to enter the lexicon,
and b) the overall percentage of terms that are promoted from the
ranked lists. Typical values for a corpus of about one million tokens are
as follows: minimum frequency threshold equal to 7 for both single and
complex terms; selected single terms are the topmost 10% in the ranked
list; selected multi-word terms are the topmost 70% in the ranked list
of potential complex terms.
3.2. Term organization and structuring
In the second extraction step, proto–conceptual structures involving ac-
quired terms are identiﬁed. The basic source of information is no longer
a chunked text, but rather the dependency–based analysis exempliﬁed
in Figure 2, with the original text containing an explicit indication of
the multi–word terminology acquired at the previous extraction stage.
We envisage two levels of conceptual organization. Terms in the
TermBank are ﬁrst organized into fragments of head–sharing taxonom-
ical chains, whereby ambiente urbano ‘urban environment’ and ambi-
ente marino ‘marine environment’ are classiﬁed as co–hyponyms of the
general single term ambiente ‘environment’.
Moreover, T2K clusters semantically–related terms by using CLASS,
a distributionally–based algorithm for building lexico–semantic classes
(Allegrini et al., 2003). According to CLASS, two terms are semantically
related if they can be used interchangeably in a statistically signiﬁcant
number of syntactic contexts. The starting point for the CLASS algo-
rithm is provided by a dataset of dependency triples – < T, C, s > –,
where T is a target linguistic expression, C is a linguistic context for
T, and s is the particular syntagmatic dependency relation between T
and C. For our present concerns, variables are interpreted as follows:
1. T corresponds to an acquired term in the TermBank;


--- PAGE 10 ---
122
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
2. s stands for either a subject or a direct object dependency relation;
3. C corresponds to a verb with which T is attested to co–occur as a
subject or a direct object. In fact, of all verb–term pairs attested in
the corpus only a subset of highly salient such pairs is considered for
clustering by CLASS. Light verbs such as take or make are likely to
give very little information about the semantic space of the terms
they select in context. Hereafter we shall refer to the set of highly
salient verbs keeping company with subject/object T as the best
verbs for T, or BV T. For each term T, BV T contains those verbs
only whose strength of association with subject/object T (measured
by the log–likelihood ratio) exceeds a ﬁxed threshold.
For all terms (both single and complex) in the TermBank, we ex-
tract from the dependency–annotated text the best verb/subject and
verb/object pairs. CLASS then computes the degree of semantic re-
latedness between two terms T1 and T2 by measuring the degree of
overlapping between BV T1 and BV T2, according to the metric de-
scribed in Allegrini et al., (2003). This corresponds to the assumption
that the semantic similarity between two terms is a function of the
possibility for the entities denoted by the terms to be involved in simi-
lar events, where the latter are expressed by the term best verbs. The
cluster of terms semantically related to a target term T is ﬁnally ordered
by decreasing similarity scores with respect to T. For each term, the user
can deﬁne the maximum number of related terms to be returned by the
system; this parameter can be set on the basis of the user’s needs (it
should be kept in mind that going down in the ranked list of related
terms the semantic distance from T increases; therefore, it becomes
more likely to ﬁnd spurious associations).
4. Ontology learning from legislative texts: a case study
In this section we summarise the results of a case study carried out on
a corpus of legal texts belonging to the environmental domain (Venturi,
2006).
4.1. Corpus description and preprocessing
The corpus consists of 824 legislative, institutional and administrative
acts concerning the environmental domain, for a total of 1.399.617
word tokens, coming from the BGA (Bollettino Giuridico Ambientale)
database edited by the Piedmont local authority for environment.1 The
1 http://extranet.regione.piemonte.it/ambiente/bga/


--- PAGE 11 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
123
Table I. An excerpt of the automatically acquired TermBank
ID
Term
Freq
Lemmatised headwords
2192
acqua calda
11
acqua caldo
974
acqua potabile
36
acqua potabile
501
acqua pubblica
121
acqua pubblico
47
acque
1655
acqua
2280
acque costiere
10
acqua costiero
2891
acque di lavaggio
6
acqua lavaggio
2648
acque di prima pioggia
8
acqua pioggia
3479
acque di transizione
5
acqua transizione
1984
acque meteoriche
12
acqua meteorico
1690
acque minerali
16
acqua minerale
400
acque reflue
231
acqua refluo
505
acque sotterranee
120
acqua sotterraneo
486
acque superficiali
131
acqua superficiale
2692
acque utilizzate
8
acqua utilizzato
corpus includes acts released by three diﬀerent agencies, i.e. the Euro-
pean Union, the Italian state and the Piedmont region, which cover a
nine years period (from 1997 to 2005). It is a heterogeneous document
collection including legal acts such as national and regional laws, euro-
pean directives, legislative decrees, etc. as well as administrative acts
such as ministerial circulars, decisions, etc.
4.2. The legal–environmental TermBank
Table I contains a fragment of the automatically acquired TermBank.
For each selected term, the TermBank reports its prototypical form (in
the column headed “Term”), its frequency of occurrence in the whole
document collection, and the lemma of the lexical head of the chunk
covering the term (see column “Lemmatised headwords”). The choice
of representing a domain term through its prototypical form rather
than the lemma (as typically done in ordinary dictionaries) follows
from the assumption that a bootstrapped glossary should reﬂect the
actual usage of terms in texts. In fact, domain-speciﬁc meanings are
often associated with a particular morphological form of a given term
(e.g. the plural form). This is well exempliﬁed in Table I where the
acquired terms headed by acqua ‘water’ can be parted into two groups
according to their prototypical form: either singular (e.g. acqua potabile
‘drinkable water’) or plural (e.g. acque superﬁciali ‘surface runoﬀ’). It


--- PAGE 12 ---
124
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
should be noted, however, that reported frequencies are not limited to
the prototypical form, but refer to all occurrences of the abstract term.
As expected from the peculiar nature of processed documents, the
acquired TermBank includes both legal and environmental terms. Since
the two classes of terms show quite diﬀerent frequency distributions,
diﬀerent acquisition experiments were carried out by setting diﬀerent
thresholds (see Section 3.1). By using standard thresholds with respect
to corpus size, we obtained a TermBank of 4.685 terms (both single and
multi–word terms): the selected minimum frequency threshold for both
single and multi-word terms was 7, the percentage of selected terms from
the ranked lists was 10% in the case of single terms and 70% for multi–
word terms. Yet, in this TermBank, environmental terms were scarcely
represented due to their high rank (and low frequency) according Zipf’s
law. Since the focus of our interest was on both types of terminology,
we carried out new acquisition experiments by reducing the minimum
frequency thresholds to 5 and 3. In both experiments, the number of
acquired environmental terms increased, unfortunately together with
noisy terms. For instance, with the minimum frequency threshold set
to 3, the numer of extracted terms is more than doubled, i.e. it is equal
to 11.103.
Evaluation of acquired results was carried out with respect to the
TermBank of 4.685 terms (i.e. the one obtained by setting the minimum
frequency threshold equal to 7). Due to the heterogeneous nature of
the terms in the glossary, belonging to both the legal–administrative
and the environmental domains, two diﬀerent resources were taken as
a gold standard: the Dizionario giuridico (Edizioni Simone) available
online2 was used as a reference resource for what concerns the legal
domain (henceforth referred to as Legal_RR), and the Glossary of
the Osservatorio Nazionale sui Riﬁuti (Ministero dell’Ambiente) avail-
able online3 for the environmental domain (henceforth referred to as
Env_RR), which contain respectively 6.041 and 1.090 terminological
entries recorded in their prototypical form. For evaluation purposes,
diﬀerent types of matches were taken into account. Besides the full
match between the T2K term and the term in the reference resource,
diﬀerent types of partial matches were also considered, i.e.:
1. the same term appears both in the T2K TermBank and in the gold
standard resource but under diﬀerent prototypical forms: this is the
case, for instance, of the term accordi di programma ‘programmatic
agreement’ which appears in the plural form in T2K and in the
singular form in Legal_RR. At this level, two terms may also diﬀer
2 http://www.simone.it/cgi-local/Dizionari/newdiz.cgi?index,5,A
3 http://www.osservatorionazionaleriﬁuti.it/ShowGlossario.asp?L=Z


--- PAGE 13 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
125
for the prepositions linking the nominal headwords of a complex
term, as in the case of acquisizione dati vs acquisizione di dati
‘acquisition of data’ or abbandono di riﬁuti vs abbandono dei riﬁuti
‘waste abandon’;
2. the gold reference resource contains a more general term whereas
T2K acquired one of its hyponyms: this is the case of the T2K term
abrogazione di norme ‘repeal of rules’, which in Legal_RR occurs
in its more general form abrogazione ‘repeal’;
3. the reverse case with respect to 2 above, i.e. the gold reference
resource contains a more speciﬁc term with respect to T2K which
extracted a more general term, typically its hyperonym: e.g. agente
di polizia ‘policeman’ (T2K) vs agente di polizia giudiziaria ‘prison
guard’ (Legal_RR).
In the cases described in 2 and 3 above, a distinction is made – again
– between matches concerning the prototypical form and matches at the
level of stemmed words.
The results of the evaluation carried out on the basis of the criteria
described above can be summarised as follows: in 51% of the cases a
match, either full or partial, was found between the T2K glossary and
the references resources; in particular, 89% of identiﬁed matches was
concerned with legal terms and 34,5% with environmental ones, with
a 23,5% of terms occurring in both reference resources. The question
arising at this point is whether the remaining 49% of terms for which
no match was found was represented by errors and noisy terms or were
domain–speciﬁc terms not appearing in the selected reference resources.
In order to answer this question, we selected two additional resources
available on the Web: the list of keywords used for the online query of
the Archivio DoGi (Dottrina Giuridica)4 for the legal domain, and the
thesaurus EARTh (Environmental Applications Reference Thesaurus)5
for the environmental domain, against which a manual evaluation was
carried out for 25% of the automatically acquired T2K glossary. The
results are quite encouraging: by including these two richer reference
resources, the percentage of matching terms increased to 75,4%. This
percentage grows up to 83,7% if we also include terms which, in spite of
their absence in the selected reference resources, were manually evalu-
ated as domain–relevant terms: this is the case, for instance, of the terms
anidride carbonica ‘carbon dioxide’ for what concerns the environmental
domain or beneﬁciari ‘beneﬁciary’ for the legal one. The percentage of
4 http://nir.ittig.cnr.it/dogiswish/dogiConsultazioneClassiﬁcazioneKWOC.php
5 http://uta.iia.cnr.it/earth.htm#EARTh%202002


--- PAGE 14 ---
126
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
manually detected errors is 21,1%, also concerning some of the terms
for which a partial match was detected. Whereas on the basis of these
results it can be claimed that the accuracy of T2K for what concerns
term extraction is quite high, nothing can be said as far as recall is
concerned. As a matter of facts, the selected reference resources could
not be used for this speciﬁc purpose due to their wider coverage, not
circumscribed to the environmental domain.
4.3. Proto–conceptual organisation of terms
A ﬁrst step towards the conceptual organization of terms in the TermBank
consists in building taxonomical chains. This is to say that single and
multi–word terms are structured in vertical relationships providing frag-
ments of taxonomical chains such as the one reported below:
applicazione
applicazione dei paragrafi
applicazione dell’ articolo
applicazione della direttiva
applicazione della legge
applicazione della tariffa
applicazione delle disposizioni
applicazione delle sanzioni
applicazione delle sanzioni amministrative
applicazione delle sanzioni previste
applicazione del presente decreto
applicazione del regolamento
applicazioni di quarantena
where the acquired direct and indirect hyponyms of the term appli-
cazione ‘enforcement’ are reported. In this example, it can be noticed
that terms sharing the head only are the direct hyponyms of the root
term. Further hyponymy levels can be detected when two or more multi–
word terms share not only the head but also modiﬁers, as in the case of
the applicazione delle sanzioni amministrative ‘enforcement of admin-
istrative sanctions’ with respect to the more general term applicazione
delle sanzioni ‘enforcement of sanctions’.
With minimum frequency threshold set to 7, the numer of extracted
hyponymic relations is 2.181 referring to 272 hyperonym terms; with
the threshold set to 3, identiﬁed hyponymic relations increase to 6.635
regarding 454 hyperonym terms.
The second structuring step performed by T2K consists in the identi-
ﬁcation of clusters of semantically related terms which is carried out on


--- PAGE 15 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
127
the basis of distributionally–based similarity measures (see Section 3.2).
In what follows, clusters of semantically related terms are exempliﬁed
for both domains:
disposizioni ‘provision’
norme, disposizioni relative, decisione, atto, prescrizioni
legge ‘law’
regolamento, protocollo, accordo, statuto, amministrazioni comunali
inquinamento ‘pollution’
danno ambientale, inquinamento marino, effetti nocivi, conseguenza,
inquinamento atmosferico
impatto ambientale ‘environmental impact’
esposizione, danno, esigenze, conseguenza, pericolo
For each target term, the set of the ﬁrst 5 most similar terms is
returned, ranked for decreasing values of semantic similarity. With the
minimum frequency threshold set to 7, the number of identiﬁed related
terms is 3.448 referring to 665 terminological headwords.
As illustrated in Section 3.2, these clusters of related terms were
computed with respect to the most salient verbs associated with each
target term: for instance, for disposizione ‘provision’ the most strongly
associated verbs included applicare ‘enforce’, adottare ‘pass’, abrogare
‘repeal’, decorrere ‘to have eﬀect from’ etc., whereas for inquinamento
‘pollution’ they range from combattere ‘ﬁght against’, ridurre ‘reduce’,
prevenire ‘prevent’, eliminare ‘eliminate’ to causare ‘cause’, provocare
‘bring about’ and controllare ‘watch’. The terms similarity chains re-
sulting from context-sensitive similarity measures are then merged and
ranked according to decreasing similarity weights. It should be appre-
ciated that in these clusters of semantically related words diﬀerent
classiﬁcatory dimensions are inevitably collapsed; they include not only
quasi–synonyms (as in the case of disposizioni ‘provision’ and norme
‘regulations’ or inquinamento ‘pollution’ and danno ambientale ‘en-
vironmental damage’), hyperonyms and hyponyms (e.g. inquinamento
‘pollution’ and inquinamento atmosferico ‘atmospheric pollution’), but
also looser word associations. As an example of the latter we mention
the relation holding between legge ‘law’ and amministrazione comu-
nale ‘municipal administration’, or between pericolo ‘danger’ and con-
seguenza ‘consequences’ and the environmental term impatto ambientale
‘environmental impact’.


--- PAGE 16 ---
128
Lenci, Montemagni, Pirrelli, Venturi
5. Conclusions and further directions of research
We reported preliminary but extremely encouraging results of the ap-
plication of an automatic ontology learning system, T2K, on a corpus of
Italian legislative texts in the environmental domain. Our work shows
that the incremental interleaving of robust NLP and machine–learning
technologies is the key to any attempt to successfully face what we
termed the acquisition paradox. By bootstrapping base domain–speciﬁc
knowledge from texts through knowledge–poor language tools we can
incrementally develop more and more sophisticated levels of content re-
presentation. In the end the purported dividing line between language–
knowledge and domain–speciﬁc knowledge proves to be untenable in
language use, where language structures and bits of world–knowledge
are inextricably intertwined.
There is an enormous potential for this bootstrapping technology.
Acquired TermBanks can be transformed into semantic networks linking
identiﬁed legal and environmental entities. Current lines of research
in this direction include a) semi–automatic induction and labelling of
ontological classes from the proto–conceptual structures identiﬁed by
T2K, and b) the extension of the acquired ontology with concept–
linking relations (ﬁrst steps in this direction are reported in Venturi,
2006).
Our experiments also hightlighted some interesting open issues which
need to be tackled in the near future. As pointed out in Section 4.2,
running T2K on a corpus of legislative and administrative acts results in
a two–faced terminological glossary, which includes terms belonging to
both the legal–administrative and environmental domains. Estabilish-
ing the domain relevance of each acquired term represents a central issue
when dealing with legal–administrative texts. Some preliminary exper-
iments have already been carried out in order to semi–automatically
identify the domain–relevance of each acquired term. In particular, ter-
minology acquisition was carried out with T2K on thematically diﬀerent
legislative corpora. By comparing the TermBanks automatically ex-
tracted from diﬀerent corpora, we could classify the terms belonging to
their intersection as belonging to the legal–administrative lexicon. This
is in line with the contrastive approach to term extraction proposed by
Basili et al. (2001). Similarly, the relevance of environmental terms will
be validated by running terminology extraction on the environmental
literature.


--- PAGE 17 ---
LP-based ontology learning from legal texts. A case study.
129
References
Allegrini, P., Montemagni, S. and V. Pirrelli. Example-Based Automatic Induction
Of Semantic Classes Through Entropic Scores. Linguistica Computazionale, 1-43:
2003.
Bartolini, R., Lenci, A., Montemagni, S. and V. Pirrelli. Grammar and Lexicon in the
Robust Parsing of Italian. Towards a Non-Naïve Interplay. In Proceedings of the
International COLING-2002 Workshop “Grammar Engineering and Evaluation”,
Taiwan 2004.
Bartolini, R., Lenci, A., Montemagni, S. and V. Pirrelli.
Hybrid Constrains for
Robust Parsing: First Experiments and Evaluation.
In Proceedings of LREC
2004, Lisbon 2004.
Bartolini, R., Giorgetti, D., Lenci, A., Montemagni, S. and V. Pirrelli.
Auto-
matic Incremental Term Acquisition from Domain Corpora. In Proceedings of
the 7th International conference on “Terminology and Knowledge Engineering”
(TKE2005), Copenhagen 2005.
Basili, R., Moschitti, A., Pazienza, M.T. and Zanzotto, F.M. A contrastive approach
to term extraction. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Terminology and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (TIA2001), Nancy, France, 2001.
Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P., and B. Magnini.
Ontology Learning from Text: an
Overview.
In Buitelaar et al. (eds.), Ontology Learning from Text: Methods,
Evaluation and Applications (Volume 123 Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Applications): 3–12, 2005.
Dell’Orletta, F., Lenci, A., Marchi, S., Montemagni, S. and V. Pirrelli.
Text-
2-Knowledge: una piattaforma linguistico-computazionale per l’estrazione di
conoscenza da testi. In Proceedings of the SLI-2006 Conference: 20–28, Vercelli
2006.
Dunning, T.
Accurate Methods for the Statistics of Surprise and Coincidence.
Computational Linguistics: 19(1), 1993.
Federici, S., Montemagni, S. and V. Pirrelli. Shallow Parsing and Text Chunking:
a View on Underspeciﬁcation in Syntax. In Proceedings of the Workshop On
Robust Parsing, in the framework of the European Summer School on Language,
Logic and Information (ESSLLI-96), Prague 1996.
Lame, G. Using NLP techniques to identify legal ontology components: concepts
and relations. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 3369: 169–184, 2005.
Sais, J. and P. Quaresma. A Methodology to Create Legal Ontologies in a Logic Pro-
gramming Based Web Information Retrieval System. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Volume 3369: 185–200, 2005.
Valente, A.
Types and Roles of Legal Ontologies.
Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Volume 3369: 65–76, 2005.
Venturi, G. L’ambiente, le norme, il computer. Studio linguistico–computazionale
per la creazione di ontologie giuridiche in materia ambientale. Degree Thesis,
Manuscript, December 2006.
Walter, S. and M. Pinkal.
Automatic extraction of deﬁnitions from german
court decisions. In Proceedings of the COLING-2006 Workshop on Information
Extraction Beyond The Document: 20–28, Sidney 2006.
